doc/website: add a page for dev-database / twin-environment (#640)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/cli/dev.md

---
title: Dev Database
id: dev-database
slug: /cli/dev-database
---
## Introduction

> Various Atlas commands accept the `--dev-url` flag. This option uses the [URL](url.mdx) format, and allow passing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Various Atlas commands accept the `--dev-url` flag. This option uses the [URL](url.mdx) format, and allows passing
```

> a development database (a twin environment) to validate schemas, simulate migration and calculate the state of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a development database (a twin environment) to validate schemas, simulate migrations and calculate the state of the
```

migration directory by replaying the historical changes. Let's go over a few examples to explain the benefits of using
a dev/twin database.

## Validation

Suppose we want to the add the following `CHECK` constraint to the table below: 

```hcl title="test.hcl" {6-8}
table "t" {
  schema = schema.test
  column "c" {
    type = int
  }
  check "ck" {
    expr = "c <> d"
  }
}
```

> After running [`schema apply`](reference.md#atlas-schema-apply), we get the following error, because the `CHECK`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After running [`schema apply`](reference.md#atlas-schema-apply), we get the following error because the `CHECK`
```

constraint is invalid, as column `d` does not exist.

```shell
$ atlas schema apply --url "mysql://root:pass@:3308/test" -f test.hcl
```
```text
-- Planned Changes:
-- Modify "t" table
ALTER TABLE `test`.`t` ADD CONSTRAINT `ck` CHECK (c <> d), DROP COLUMN `c1`, ADD COLUMN `c` int NOT NULL
✔ Apply
Error: modify "t" table: Error 1054: Unknown column 'd' in 'check constraint ck expression'
exit status 1
```

Atlas cannot predict such errors without applying the schema file on the database, because some cases require parsing
and compiling SQL expressions, traverse their AST and validate them. This is already implemented by the database engine.

> Migration failures can leave the database in a broken state, because some like MySQL do not support transactional

Reviewer 2: This is an unexpected logical jump in the text flow. Maybe numerate the 2 examples why we need the dev twin?

> Migration failures can leave the database in a broken state, because some like MySQL do not support transactional

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Migration failures can leave the database in a broken state, because some databases like MySQL do not support transactional
```

> Migration failures can leave the database in a broken state, because some like MySQL do not support transactional

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Migration failures can leave the database in a broken state. Some databases, like MySQL, do not support transactional
```

> migration due to [implicit COMMIT](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/implicit-commit.html). However, this can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
migration due to [implicit COMMITs](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/implicit-commit.html). However, this can
```

Author: Why plural?

Reviewer 2: There most likely more than one implicit commit done, therefore plural

Author: I prefer keeping it singular because I use it as a term/concept.

> migration due to [implicit COMMIT](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/implicit-commit.html). However, this can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
migrations due to [implicit COMMIT](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/implicit-commit.html). However, this can
```

> be avoided using the `--dev-url` option. Passing this option to `schema apply` will create and validate first the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be avoided using the `--dev-url` option. Passing it to `schema apply` will first create and validate the
```
option ... option

> be avoided using the `--dev-url` option. Passing this option to `schema apply` will create and validate first the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be avoided using the `--dev-url` option. Passing this option to `schema apply` will first create and validate the
```

> desired state (the HCL schema file) on temporary named-databases (schemas), and continue to the `apply` stage in case

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
desired state (the HCL schema file) on temporary named-databases (schemas), and only then continue to `apply` the changes if
```

it passed successfully.

```shell
$ atlas schema apply --url "mysql://root:pass@:3308/test" -f test.hcl
  --dev-url="mysql://root:pass@:3308/test"
```
```text
Error: create "t" table: Error 3820: Check constraint 'ck' refers to non-existing column 'd'.
exit status 1
```

## Diffing

> Atlas adopts the declarative approach for maintaining the schema desired state, but provides 2 ways to manage and apply

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Atlas adopts the declarative approach for maintaining the schemas desired state, but provides two ways to manage and apply
```

> Atlas adopts the declarative approach for maintaining the schema desired state, but provides 2 ways to manage and apply

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Atlas adopts the declarative approach for maintaining the schema's desired state, but provides two ways to manage and apply
```

> changes on the database, `schema apply` and `migrate diff`. In both commands, Atlas compares the "current", and the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
changes on the database: `schema apply` and `migrate diff`. In both commands, Atlas compares the "current", and the
```

> "desired" states and suggests a migration-plan to bring the "current" to the "desired". For example, the "current state"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
"desired" states and suggests a migration-plan to migrate the "current" state to the "desired" state. For example, the "current" state
```

> can be an inspected database or a `migrations` directory, and the "desired state" can be an inspected database, or an HCL

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
can be an inspected database or a migration directory, and the "desired" state can be an inspected database, or an HCL
```

Author: Are you sure, because I took the name "migrations" from your example in ent. 
https://entgo.io/docs/versioned-migrations#from-client

Reviewer 2: It can be named whatever the users wishes. Therefore I think we should call it `migration directory` without a name

file.

> Schemas that are written in HCL files, are defined in a natural form by humans. However, databases store schemas in a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Schemas that are written in HCL files are defined in a natural form by humans. However, databases store schemas in a
```

> Schemas that are written in HCL files, are defined in a natural form by humans. However, databases store schemas in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Schemas that are written in HCL files are defined in a natural form by humans. However, databases store schemas in 
```

> normal form (also known as canonical form). Therefore, when Atlas compares 2 different forms it may suggest incorrect or

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
normal form (also known as canonical form). Therefore, when Atlas compares two different forms it may suggest incorrect or
```

> normal form (also known as canonical form). Therefore, when Atlas compares 2 different forms it may suggest incorrect or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
normal form (also known as canonical form). Therefore, when Atlas compares two different forms it may suggest incorrect or
```

> unnecessary schema changes, and using the `--dev-url` option can solve this (See the above section for more details).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unnecessary schema changes, and using the `--dev-url` option can solve this (see the above section for more in-depth example).
```

Let's see it in action, by adding an index-expression to our schema.

```hcl title="test.hcl" {6-10}
table "t" {
  schema = schema.test
  column "c" {
    type = varchar(32)
  }
  index "i" {
    on {
      expr = "upper(concat('c', c))"
    }
  }
}
```

```shell
$ atlas schema apply --url "mysql://root:pass@:3308/test" -f test.hcl 
```
```text
-- Planned Changes:
-- Modify "t" table
ALTER TABLE `test`.`t` ADD INDEX `i` ((upper(concat('c', c))))
✔ Apply
```

We added a new index-expression to our schema, but using `schema inspect` will show our index in its normal form.

```shell
$ atlas schema inspect --url "mysql://root:pass@:3308/test"  
```
```hcl {7-11}
table "t" {
  schema = schema.test
  column "c" {
    null = false
    type = varchar(32)
  }
  index "i" {
    on {
      expr = "upper(concat(_utf8mb4'c',`c`))"
    }
  }
}
```

> Therefore, running `schema apply` again, will suggest another schema changes, that of course not necessary.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, running `schema apply` again, will suggest another schema changes, that of course is not necessary.
```

> Therefore, running `schema apply` again, will suggest another schema changes, that of course not necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, running `schema apply` again will suggest an unnecessary schema change.

```shell
$ atlas schema apply --url "mysql://root:pass@:3308/test" -f test.hcl 
```
```text
-- Planned Changes:
-- Modify "t" table
ALTER TABLE `test`.`t` DROP INDEX `i`
-- Modify "t" table
ALTER TABLE `test`.`t` ADD INDEX `i` ((upper(concat('c', c))))
✔ Abort
```

> Same as before, we will use the `--dev-url` option to solve this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly to the previous example, we will use the `--dev-url` option to solve this.
```

```hcl title="test.hcl" {6-8}
table "t" {
  schema = schema.test
  column "c" {
    type = int
  }
  check "ck" {
    expr = "c <> d"
  }
}
```

After running [`schema apply`](reference.md#atlas-schema-apply), we get the following error because the `CHECK`
constraint is invalid, as column `d` does not exist.

```shell
$ atlas schema apply --url "mysql://root:pass@:3308/test" -f test.hcl
```
```text
-- Planned Changes:
-- Modify "t" table
ALTER TABLE `test`.`t` ADD CONSTRAINT `ck` CHECK (c <> d), DROP COLUMN `c1`, ADD COLUMN `c` int NOT NULL
✔ Apply
Error: modify "t" table: Error 1054: Unknown column 'd' in 'check constraint ck expression'
exit status 1
```

Atlas cannot predict such errors without applying the schema file on the database, because some cases require parsing
and compiling SQL expressions, traverse their AST and validate them. This is already implemented by the database engine.

Migration failures can leave the database in a broken state. Some databases, like MySQL, do not support transactional
migrations due to [implicit COMMIT](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/implicit-commit.html). However, this can be

> avoided using the `--dev-url` option. Passing this it to `schema apply` will first create and validate the desired state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
avoided using the `--dev-url` option. Passing this to `schema apply` will first create and validate the desired state
```

(the HCL schema file) on temporary named-databases (schemas), and only then continue to `apply` the changes if it passed
successfully.

```shell
$ atlas schema apply --url "mysql://root:pass@:3308/test" -f test.hcl
  --dev-url="mysql://root:pass@:3308/test"
```
```text
Error: create "t" table: Error 3820: Check constraint 'ck' refers to non-existing column 'd'.
exit status 1
```

## Diffing

Atlas adopts the declarative approach for maintaining the schemas desired state, but provides two ways to manage and
apply changes on the database: `schema apply` and `migrate diff`. In both commands, Atlas compares the "current", and the
"desired" states and suggests a migration plan to migrate the "current" state to the "desired" state. For example, the

> "current" state can be an inspected database or a migration directory, and the "desired state" can be an inspected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"current" state can be an inspected database or a migration directory, and the "desired" state can be an inspected
```
